--- PAGE 1 ---

Practice Point 2.1.1: Monitoring long-term glycemic con-
trol by HbA1c twice per year is reasonable for patients with
diabetes. HbA1c may be measured as often as 4 times per
year if the glycemic target is not met or after a change in
glucose-lowering therapy.
HbA1c monitoring facilitates control of diabetes to ach-
ieve glycemic targets that prevent diabetic complications. In
both T1D or T2D, lower achieved levels of HbA1c <7%
(<53 mmol/mol) versus 8%–9% (64–75 mmol/mol) reduce
risk of overall microvascular complications, including ne-
phropathy and retinopathy, and macrovascular complications
in some RCTs.189–193 The potential harm of monitoring by
HbA1c is that it may underestimate (more commonly) or
overestimate (less commonly) the actual degree of glycemia
control compared to directly measured blood glucose in
advanced CKD. No advantages of glycated albumin or
fructosamine over HbA1c are known for glycemic moni-
toring in CKD. Frequency of HbA1c testing is recommended
as often as 4 times per year to align with a 10–12-week time
period for which it reﬂects ambient glycemia according to
normal duration of red blood cell survival. In the judgment
of the Work Group, it is reasonable to test HbA1c twice per
year in many patients who are stable and achieving glycemic
goals. Measuring HbA1c more frequently would be reason-
able
in
patients
with
adjustments
in
glucose-lowering
medication, changes in lifestyle factors, or marked changes
in measured blood glucose values, or those who are less
concerned about the burden or costs of more frequent lab-
oratory testing.226

Practice Point 2.1.2: Accuracy and precision of HbA1c
measurement
declines
with
advanced
CKD
(G4–G5),
particularly among patients treated by dialysis, in whom
HbA1c measurements have low reliability.
Correlations of directly measured blood glucose levels with
3 glycemic biomarkers—HbA1c, glycated albumin, and
fructosamine—were progressively weaker with advanced
CKD stages (G4–G5), especially kidney failure treated by
dialysis.196,197,205,210,227 However, HbA1c remains the glyce-
mic biomarker of choice in advanced CKD because glycated
albumin and fructosamine provide no advantages over HbA1c
and have clinically relevant assay biases to the low and high
levels,
respectively,
with
hypoalbuminemia,
a
common

condition among patients with proteinuria, malnutrition, or
treated by peritoneal dialysis.228

Practice Point 2.1.3: A glucose management indicator
(GMI) derived from continuous glucose monitoring (CGM)
data can be used to index glycemia for individuals in whom
HbA1c is not concordant with directly measured blood
glucose levels or clinical symptoms.
CGM and self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) yield
direct measurements of interstitial and blood glucose, respec-
tively, that are not known to be biased by CKD or its treat-
ments, including dialysis or kidney transplant (Figure 12229).
Therefore, if it is a clinical concern that HbA1c may be yielding
biased estimates of long-term glycemia (e.g., discordant with
SMBG, random blood glucose levels, or hypoglycemic or hy-
perglycemic symptoms), it is reasonable to use CGM to
generate a glucose management indicator (GMI).228 The GMI
can be derived from CGM that is performed with results either
blinded to the patients during monitoring (“professional”
version) or available to the patient in real time. The GMI is a
measure of average blood glucose that is calculated from CGM
and expressed in the units of HbA1c (%), facilitating inter-
pretation of the HbA1c values. For example, if HbA1c is lower
than a concurrent GMI measure, the HbA1c can be interpreted
to underestimate average blood glucose by the difference in
measurements,
allowing
adjustment
of
HbA1c
targets
accordingly.230,231 GMI may be useful for patients with
advanced CKD, including those treated with dialysis, for whom
reliability of HbA1c is low. It should be noted that the assay bias
of HbA1c relative to GMI could potentially change over time
within a patient, particularly when there are clinical changes
that affect red blood cell turnover or protein glycation. In these
situations, GMI needs to be re-established regularly.

Practice Point 2.1.4: Daily glycemic monitoring with CGM
or self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) may help
prevent hypoglycemia and improve glycemic control when
glucose-lowering therapies associated with risk of hypo-
glycemia are used.
In addition to long-term glycemic control, minute-to-
minute glycemic variability and episodes of hypoglycemia
are important therapeutic targets for people with diabetes and
CKD, especially those with T1D and those treated with

CKD G4–G5
including treatment by
dialysis or kidney transplant

CKD G1–G3b

Population
GMI
Reliability
Frequency

HbA1c

Measure

Yes

Yes

• Twice per year
• Up to 4 times per year if not achieving
  target or change in therapy

• Twice per year
• Up to 4 times per year if not achieving
  target or change in therapy

High
Occasionally useful

Low
Likely useful

Figure 11 | Frequency of glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) measurement and use of glucose management indicator (GMI) in chronic
kidney disease (CKD). G1–G3b, estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate (eGFR) $30 ml/min per 1.73 m2; G4–G5, eGFR <30 ml/min per 1.73 m2.

www.kidney-international.org
chapter 2

Kidney International (2022) 102 (Suppl 5S), S1–S127
S57

--- PAGE 2 ---

hypoglycemic medications such as insulin. For daily glycemic
monitoring, CGM and SMBG are frequently used but rela-
tively high-cost options to assess real-time blood glucose.
Real-time assessments of glucose promote effective self-
management. Advanced CKD substantially increases the risk
of hypoglycemia in patients with diabetes treated by many
oral agents and insulin. Daily monitoring improves the safety
of glucose-lowering therapy by identifying ﬂuctuations in
glucose as a means to avoid hypoglycemia. CGM and SMBG
also aid in achieving glycemic targets. SMBG was emphasized
in previous clinical practice guidelines for daily glycemic
monitoring in patients with diabetes and CKD.230,231 How-
ever, CGM was not generally available for clinical use at that
time (2007), and the potential advantages of the latter may
make it preferable to SMBG among patients in whom daily
monitoring is desired.

In the judgment of the Work Group, there is no clear
advantage of CGM or SMBG for patients with diabetes and
CKD treated by oral glucose-lowering agents that do not
cause hypoglycemia.226 However, daily monitoring may
mitigate the higher risk of hypoglycemia associated with
taking insulin or certain oral agents (Figure 13). Although
there are burdens and expenses, daily glycemic monitoring to
achieve targets while avoiding hypoglycemia is prudent. In the
judgment of the Work Group, many patients with diabetes
and CKD would choose daily glycemic monitoring by CGM
or, when CGM not readily available, SMBG, especially pa-
tients with T1D and patients using glucose-lowering therapies
associated with hypoglycemia. Glucose-lowering agents not
associated with hypoglycemia are preferable therapies for
patients with diabetes and CKD who do not use CGM or
SMBG, such as those without access to these technologies or

Glossary of glucose monitoring terms

Time in range (TIR)
This is a metric of
glycemic control that
assesses the percentage
of CGM readings within
a certain range.

Commonly accepted
ranges are 70–180 mg/dl
(3.9–10.0 mmol/l) at >70%
of readings; time per day

Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM)
Minimally invasive subcutaneous sensors which sample interstitial glucose at regular intervals (e.g., every 5–15 min). 
There are three categories of CGMs:

Self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG)

Since sampling is performed intermittently, episodes of hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia are often harder to detect

Glucose management indicator (GMI)
Provides a measure of average blood glucose levels calculated from CGM readings, expressed in units of A1C (%), that can be used to gauge whether clinical
A1C levels are falsely high or low

(c) Intermittently scanned CGM

CGM or FGM for short.
Glucose levels can be
seen while the device
is worn when they are
queried

(b) Real-time CGM (rtCGM)

Refers to sensors transmitting
and/or displaying the data
automatically throughout
the day, so that the patient
can review glucose levels
and adjust treatment as
needed

(a) Retrospective CGM
Glucose levels are not visible
while the device is worn.
Instead, a report is generated
for evaluation after the CGM
is removed

Time above range/
time in hyperglycemia

Time in range

Time below range/
time in hypoglycemia

>250 mg/dl
(13.9 mmol/l)

>180 mg/dl
(10.0 mmol/l)

Target range
70–180 mg/dl
(3.9–10.0 mmol/l)

<70 mg/dl (3.9 mmol/l)
<54 mg/dl (3.0 mmol/l)

250

350

180

70

54

0

Target range
Time in range (mg/dL)

m
a
2
1
m
a
2
1
3 am
6 am
9 am
12 pm 3 pm
6 pm
9 pm

95%

75%

25%

5%

50%

Figure 12 | Glossary of glucose-monitoring terms. Adapted from American Diabetes Association, Clinical targets for continuous glucose
monitoring data interpretation: recommendations from the international consensus on time in range, American Diabetes Association, 2019.
Copyright and all rights reserved. Material from this publication has been used with the permission of American Diabetes Association.229

chapter 2
www.kidney-international.org

S58
Kidney International (2022) 102 (Suppl 5S), S1–S127

--- PAGE 3 ---

ability to do self-monitoring, or preference to avoid the daily
burden.

Practice Point 2.1.5: For patients with T2D and CKD who
choose not to do daily glycemic monitoring by CGM or
SMBG, glucose-lowering agents that pose a lower risk of
hypoglycemia are preferred and should be administered in
doses that are appropriate for the level of eGFR.
Patients with diabetes and more advanced CKD stages are
at increased risk of hypoglycemia. Selecting glucose-lowering
agents with very low or no hypoglycemia risk should be
considered, especially for patients who cannot perform or
choose not to perform daily blood glucose monitoring.
Risk of hypoglycemia is high in patients with advanced
CKD who are treated by glucose-lowering agents that raise
blood
insulin
levels
(exogenous
insulin,
sulfonylureas,
meglitinides). Therefore, without daily glycemic monitoring,
it is often difﬁcult to avoid hypoglycemic episodes. This risk
can be averted by using glucose-lowering agents that are not
inherently
associated
with
occurrence
of
hypoglycemia
(metformin, SGLT2i, GLP-1 RA, dipeptidyl peptidase-4
[DPP-4] inhibitors).

Practice Point 2.1.6: CGM devices are rapidly evolving with
multiple functionalities (e.g., real-time and intermittently
scanned CGM). Newer CGM devices may offer advantages
for certain patients, depending on their values, goals, and
preferences.
CGM technology has greatly impacted diabetes self-
management by providing glycemic assessment moment-to-
moment, allowing patients to make real-time decisions about
their hyperglycemic treatment. The technology continues to
quickly develop with multiple permutations and functional-
ities, including real-time and intermittently scanned CGM,
alarms for low and high values, direct cell phone linkage,
factory calibration, new metrics such as GMI and ambulatory
glucose proﬁles, and integration into closed-loop insulin de-
livery systems. Multiple devices allowing for continuous or
ﬂash glucose monitoring are now available. Consultation with
a specialist in diabetes technology (certiﬁed diabetes educator
or other provider) can help patients select the device that is
most appropriate for patients with diabetes and CKD.

Currently available devices have multiple functionalities that
may include the ability to save, export, and share data to
communicate with ambulatory insulin pumps directly, and to
set alarms for low or high glucose levels, as well as for their
rates of rise or decline. These devices differ in their accuracy,
need for calibration (with ﬁngerstick-derived blood glucose
data), placement, sensor life, warm-up time, type of trans-
mitter, display options, live data–sharing capacity, cost, and
insurance coverage. Specialists in diabetes technology can assist
patients with staying current with these advances and helping
them choose the right CGM system for their individual needs.

Research recommendations
In patients with T1D or T2D and advanced CKD, especially
kidney failure treated by dialysis or kidney transplant, research
is needed to:

 Develop methods to identify patients for whom HbA1c pro-
duces a biased estimate of long-term glycemia and develop
alternate approaches to monitoring glycemia in such patients.

 Develop methods to identify patients at high risk of hy-
poglycemia or poor glycemic control who may beneﬁt from
CGM or SMBG.

 Develop approaches to effectively apply CGM to glycemic
assessment in patients at high risk of hypoglycemia or for
whom HbA1c is biased.

 Determine overall beneﬁts and harms of using SMBG and
CGM.

 Develop and validate alternative biomarkers for long-term
glycemic monitoring.

 Deﬁne optimal approaches for monitoring glycemia.

 Test whether CGM helps to control glycemia and improve
clinical outcomes.

2.2 Glycemic targets

Recommendation 2.2.1: We recommend an individ-
ualized HbA1c target ranging from <6.5% to <8.0%
in patients with diabetes and CKD not treated with
dialysis (Figure 14) (1C).

This recommendation places a higher value on the potential
beneﬁts of an individualized target aimed at balancing the

• Metformin 
• SGLT2 inhibitors
• GLP-1 receptor agonists 
• DPP-4 inhibitors

• Insulin
• Sulfonylureas
• Meglitinides

G
B
M
S
r
o
M
G
C
r
o
f
ela
n
oit
a
R
st
n
e
g
a
ci
m
e
c
ylg
r
e
p
y
h
it
n
A
Risk of hypoglycemia

Higher

Lower

Higher

Lower

Figure 13 | Relationship of glucose-lowering drug choice to risk of hypoglycemia and rationale for using continuous glucose
monitoring (CGM) or self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG). DPP-4, dipeptidyl peptidase-4; GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide-1; SGLT2,
sodium–glucose cotransporter-2.

www.kidney-international.org
chapter 2

Kidney International (2022) 102 (Suppl 5S), S1–S127
S59

--- PAGE 4 ---

long-term beneﬁts of glycemic control with the short-term risks
of hypoglycemia. The recommendation places a lower value on
the simplicity of a single target that is recommended for all
patients with diabetes and CKD. For patients for whom pre-
vention of complications is the key goal, a lower HbA1c target
(e.g., <6.5% or <7.0%) might be preferred. For those with
multiple comorbidities or increased burden of hypoglycemia, a
higher HbA1c target (e.g., <7.5% or <8.0%) might be
preferred (Figure 14). This recommendation applies to patients
with T1D or T2D.

Key information
Balance of beneﬁts and harms. HbA1c targets are central to
guide glucose-lowering treatment. In the general diabetes
population, higher HbA1c levels have been associated with
increased risk of microvascular and macrovascular compli-
cations. Moreover, in clinical trials, targeting lower HbA1c
levels has reduced the rates of chronic diabetes complications
in patients with T1D190,232–238 or T2D.239–246 The main harm
associated with lower HbA1c targets is hypoglycemia. In the
Action
to
Control
Cardiovascular
Risk
in
Diabetes
(ACCORD) trial of T2D, mortality was also higher among
participants assigned to the lower HbA1c target, perhaps due
to hypoglycemia and related cardiovascular events.240

Among patients with diabetes and CKD, a U-shaped as-
sociation of HbA1c with adverse health outcomes has been
observed, suggesting risks with both inadequately controlled
blood glucose and excessively lowered blood glucose.247

However, the beneﬁts and harms for the proposed HbA1c
targets on patients with T2D are derived mostly from studies
that used glucose-lowering agents known to increase hypo-
glycemia risk. Patients randomized to lower HbA1c levels
had increased rates of severe hypoglycemia in these studies.
Notably, however, lower HbA1c targets may not necessarily
lead to a signiﬁcant increase in hypoglycemia rates when
attained
using
medications
with
a
lower
risk
of
hypoglycemia.
Data from RCTs support the recommendation of targeting
an individualized HbA1c level of <6.5% to <8.0% in patients
with diabetes and CKD, compared with higher HbA1c targets.
HbA1c targets in this range are associated with better overall
survival and cardiovascular outcomes, along with decreased

incidence of moderately increased albuminuria and other
microvascular outcomes, such as retinopathy. HbA1c levels in
this range may also be associated with lower risk of pro-
gression to advanced CKD and kidney failure.
However, the beneﬁts of more-stringent glycemic control
(i.e., lower HbA1c targets) compared with less-stringent
glycemic control (i.e., higher HbA1c targets) manifest over
many years of treatment.191,248,249 In addition, more-
stringent glycemic control compared with less-stringent
glycemic control increases the risk of hypoglycemia.240 In-
dividual patient factors modify both anticipated beneﬁts and
anticipated
risks
of
more-stringent
glycemic
control
(Figure 14). For example, younger patients with few
comorbidities, mild-to-moderate CKD, and longer life ex-
pectancy may anticipate substantial cumulative long-term
beneﬁts of stringent glycemic control and therefore prefer
a lower HbA1c target. Patients who are treated with medi-
cations that do not cause substantial hypoglycemia, who
have preserved hypoglycemia awareness and resources to
detect and intervene early in the course of hypoglycemia,
and who have demonstrated an ability to attain stringent
HbA1c targets without hypoglycemia may also prefer a lower
HbA1c target. Patients with opposite characteristics may
prefer higher HbA1c targets. A ﬂexible approach allows each
patient to optimize these tradeoffs, whereas a “one-size-ﬁts-
all” single HbA1c target may offer insufﬁcient long-term
organ protection for some patients and place others at un-
due risk of hypoglycemia. Therefore, individualization of
HbA1c targets in patients with diabetes and CKD should be
an interactive process that includes individual assessment of
risk, life expectancy, disease/therapy burden, and patient
preferences.
Quality of evidence. A systematic review with 3 compari-
sons examining the effects of lower (#7.0%, #6.5%,
and #6.0%) versus higher (standard of care) HbA1c targets
in patients with diabetes and CKD was undertaken.
The updated Cochrane systematic review250 identiﬁed 11
studies that compared a target HbA1c <7.0% to higher
HbA1c targets (standard glycemic control) (Supplementary
Table S11190,191,232,234,235,240,242–244,246,251–253) Three studies
were also identiﬁed but were not eligible for inclusion in the
meta-analysis.233,236,254 The review found that a target of

CKD G1
Severity of CKD

HbA1c
< 6.5%
< 8.0%

CKD G5

Absent/minor
Macrovascular complications
Present/severe

Few
Comorbidities
Many

Long
Life expectancy
Short

Present
Hypoglycemia awareness
Impaired

Available
Resources for hypoglycemia management
Scarce

Low
Propensity of treatment to cause hypoglycemia
High

Figure 14 | Factors guiding decisions on individual glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) targets. CKD, chronic kidney disease; G1, estimated
glomerular ﬁltration rate (eGFR) $90 ml/min per 1.73 m2; G5, eGFR <15 ml/min per 1.73 m2.

chapter 2
www.kidney-international.org

S60
Kidney International (2022) 102 (Suppl 5S), S1–S127

